DOCSP-40818 - What's New (#49)
mongodb/docs-cpp: source/whats-new.txt

.. _cpp-whats-new:

==========
What's New
==========

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: update, new feature, deprecation, upgrade, driver

Learn what's new in:

* :ref:`Version 3.10 <version-3.10>`
* :ref:`Version 3.9 <version-3.9>`

.. _upcoming-breaking-changes:

.. _version-3.10:

What's New in 3.10
------------------

.. warning:: Breaking Changes

   This driver version contains the following breaking changes:
   

>    - Drops support for ``find_package(libbsoncxx)`` and ``find_package(libmongocxx)``.

Author: yeah, this came up during a tech review on a [previous PR](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-cpp/pull/43#discussion_r1686959378). The command itself is still supported, but the driver now requires a different kind of package be passed as the argument. Reworded slightly.

     Use ``find_package(bsoncxx)`` and ``find_package(mongocxx)``
     instead.
   - Drops support for the ``LIBBSONCXX_*`` and ``LIBMONGOCXX_*`` CMake variables
     provided by the legacy CMake package config files. Use the ``mongo::bsoncxx_*`` and
     ``mongo::mongocxx_*`` CMake targets instead.
   - Removes the experimental C++ standard library (``BSONCXX_POLY_USE_STD_EXPERIMENTAL``)

>      as a polyfill option.

Author: we should probably be clear that BSONCXX_POLY_USE_STD_EXPERIMENTAL is _the_ experimental standard library, not just one of many, by offsetting it as an appositive. if the parens are a problem, i'll use commas instead.

- Adds forward headers that provide non-defining declarations of ``bsoncxx`` and
  ``mongocxx`` class types. The driver does not support user-defined forward declarations
  of any library entity. To obtain the declaration or definition of a library entity,
  always include the corresponding header.
- The CMake option ``ENABLE_BSONCXX_USE_POLY_IMPLS`` allows selecting
  ``bsoncxx`` implementations of C++17 polyfills by default when no polyfill library is
  requested. This option is ``OFF`` by default.
- The CMake option ``BSONCXX_POLY_USE_IMPLS`` allows selecting ``bsoncxx`` implementations
  of C++17 polyfills instead of external libraries or the C++ standard library. This
  option is ``OFF`` by default.
- The ``bsoncxx::v_noabi`` and ``mongocxx::v_noabi`` namespaces are no longer declared inline.
  Root namespace declarations are still supported and expected to remain equivalent to
  their prior definitions. For example, ``bsoncxx::document`` is still equivalent to
  ``bsoncxx::v_noabi::document``, and ``mongocxx::client`` is still equivalent to
  ``mongocxx::v_noabi::client``. Argument-dependent lookup and template instantiations

>   are expected to remain equivalent to their prior behavior.

Author: Good question! This language comes directly from the [release notes](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver/releases/tag/r3.10.0), which makes me think this is as much as they know? I can bring it up with the tech reviewer

>   are expected to remain equivalent to their prior behavior.

Reviewer: This phrasing was me being honest regarding my level of confidence concerning the backward compatibility of this refactor.

C++ argument-dependent lookup and template instantiation rules are infamously complicated; despite my best efforts, even if I am confident that the _normal_ and _expected_ usage of the C++ Driver interfaces will remain compatible, I couldn't be 100% confident that absolutely _no_ user code won't be broken due to some unforeseen (likely esoteric) usage pattern (see: Hyrum's Law). This concern is why I also included in the release notes:

> If this change does inadvertently break source or binary compatibility, please submit a bug report.

The intent and expectation is that this does not break user code. I do not believe anyone has submiited such a bug report yet since the release. If we'd prefer this language be more definitive in the "What's New" documentation, that is fine by me.

>   are expected to remain equivalent to their prior behavior.

Author: Swapped in the bit about submitting a bug report. I considered adding it as as general recommendation at the top of the page, but didn't think was necessary, and thought it could even be more confusing given all of the actual breaking changes on the page.

- By default, when library filenames are compiled with MSVC (as detected by CMake's ``MSVC``
  variable), they're now embedded with an ABI tag string. These strings are similar to
  the following:
  
  .. code-block:: bash

     bsoncxx-v_noabi-rhs-x64-v142-md.lib

  To disable this behavior, set ``ENABLE_ABI_TAG_IN_LIBRARY_FILENAMES=OFF`` as part of
  your CMake configuration.

  The ABI tag string can also be embedded in pkg-config metadata filenames, similar to the
  following:
    
  .. code-block:: bash
      
     libbsoncxx-v_noabi-rhs-x64-v142-md.pc
       
  To enable this behavior, set ``ENABLE_ABI_TAG_IN_LIBRARY_FILENAMES=ON`` and
  ``ENABLE_ABI_TAG_IN_PKGCONFIG_FILENAMES=ON`` as part of your CMake configuration.

> 

Author: good call

.. _version-3.9:

What's New in 3.9
-----------------

.. warning:: Breaking Changes

   This driver version contains the following breaking changes:

   - Removes support for exported targets from the CMake project build tree
   - Drops support for macOS 10.14, macOS 10.15, and Ubuntu 14.04
   - Requires MongoDB C Driver v1.25.0 or later to support the ``FetchContent`` module
     and for consistency with the MongoDB C Driver
   - Requires CMake v3.15 or later

The v3.9 release includes the following new features:

- The {+driver-short+} container image is now available on

>   `Docker hub. <https://hub.docker.com/r/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver>`__

Author: I've gone back and forth on this, and even the [examples in our Style Guide](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/links-and-cross-references/#link-and-cross-reference-examples) are inconsistent. I finally went looking and found a consensus with supporting citations on [StackOverflow](https://ux.stackexchange.com/questions/17331/should-a-full-sentence-html-link-include-the-period-in-the-linked-text); seems like outside the sentence is the way to go.

- The driver automatically downloads the MongoDB C Driver dependency if you don't provide
  it.
- The driver no longer builds tests as part of the ``all`` target. To build tests,
  set ``BUILD_TESTING=ON`` as part of your CMake configuration.
- The driver uses the ``FetchContent`` module to download and build the
  `MNMLSTC Core <https://github.com/mnmlstc/core>`__ polyfill library, if not
  provided by the system, instead of the ``ExternalProject`` module. It also does not
  patch ``include`` directives in MNMLSTC Core headers.
- Adds the CMake option ``MONGOCXX_OVERRIDE_DEFAULT_INSTALL_PREFIX``. If this option is set to
  ``TRUE``, the ``CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX`` option defaults to the build directory.
  The default value of this option is ``TRUE``.
- Adds API to manage

>   :atlas:`Atlas Search indexes. <atlas-search/index-definitions/#std-label-ref-index-definitions>`

Author: Looking at [the commit,](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver/commit/07733743611a855afec8bc56acee941ba66c02d7) it appears to be more than just methods, so I think API makes more sense

- Adds the ``VERSIONINFO`` resource to ``bsoncxx.dll`` and ``mongocxx.dll``.
- Explicitly documents that throwing an exception from an APM callback is undefined behavior.
- Does not prematurely install MNMLSTC Core headers during the CMake build step.
- Requires that a MongoDB C Driver CMake package is found via ``find_dependency()`` for all
  installed {+driver-short+} package configurations.

> - Documents availability of the {+driver-short+} on

Author: I believe this is "documents" as a verb; i.e., the driver is now documented on vcpkg and conan as being available through those package managers

> - Documents availability of the {+driver-short+} on

Author: After digging into the ticket, I'm not convinced this needs to be on this page.

.. _cpp-whats-new:

==========
What's New
==========

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: update, new feature, deprecation, upgrade, driver

Learn what's new in:

* :ref:`Version 3.10 <version-3.10>`
* :ref:`Version 3.9 <version-3.9>`

.. _upcoming-breaking-changes:

.. _version-3.10:

What's New in 3.10
------------------

> .. warning:: Breaking Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. warning:: Breaking Changes (Build System)
```

I would like to establish a pattern/precedent of distinguishing _API_ breaking changes from _build system/packaging_ breaking changes. Currently, all breaking changes listed in this PR are _build system_ breaking changes.

Although we do not yet have any API breaking changes in the current list of changes, I believe we should start applying this pattern now rather than later to be consistent with [wording in our other doc pages](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-cpp/pull/43#discussion_r1686933180).

An example of expected ordering and contents:

> [!WARNING]
> **Breaking Changes (API)**
>
> - Changes concerning the API of the C++ Driver libraries.
> - Addressing incompatibilities may require modifying C++ source code in user projects.
> - Removed function `func(A)`. Use `func(A, B)` instead.
> - Changed redeclaration of `bsoncxx::foo` from `v1::foo` to `v2::foo`. Qualify `bsoncxx::foo` as `bsoncxx::v1::foo` to continue using the old interface.

> [!WARNING]
> **Breaking Changes (ABI)**
> - Changes concerning the ABI of the C++ Driver libraries.
> - Addressing incompatibilites may require rebuilding user projects (modifying C++ source code may not be necessary).
> - Removed exported symbol for `v1::func(A)`. Use `v2::func(A)` instead.

> [!WARNING]
> **Breaking Changes (Build System)**
>
> - Changes concerning the build system or packaging of the C++ Driver libraries.
> - Addressing incompatibilities may require modifying build system configurations or package/dependency management settings in user projects (modifying or rebuilding C++ source code may not be necessary).
> - Removed configuration variable `ENABLE_FOO`.
> - Dropped support for platform X / compiler B / architecture C.

These three kinds of breaking changes have different stability requirements, conditions, and corresponding impact on users. I believe it is worth distinguishing them accordingly.

.. _cpp-whats-new:

==========
What's New
==========

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: update, new feature, deprecation, upgrade, driver

Overview
--------

Learn what's new in:

* :ref:`Version 3.10 <version-3.10>`
* :ref:`Version 3.9 <version-3.9>`

Breaking Change Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Breaking changes introduced by new versions of the {+driver-short+} belong to one of the

Reviewer 2: S: not necessary, but you could reword to cut out the passive voice:

```suggestion
New versions of the {+driver-short+} can introduce the following types of breaking changes:
```

> following groups:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Typo.

- **API** changes concern the API of the {+driver-short+} libraries. These changes are
  accompanied by an API major version bump. You might need to edit C++ source code
  in your project to address these changes.

  .. example::

>      - Removed function ``func(A)``. Use ``func(A, B)`` instead.
>      - Changed redeclaration of ``bsoncxx::foo`` from ``v1::foo`` to ``v2::foo``. Qualify
>        ``bsoncxx::foo`` as ``bsoncxx::v1::foo`` to continue using the old interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Removes the declaration of function ``v1::func()``. (The definition is still provided for ABI compatibility.)
     - Removes the inline function `v_noabi::func()`.
     - Removes `v_noabi::func()`.
     - Changes the redeclaration of ``bsoncxx::foo`` from ``v1::foo`` to ``v2::foo``.
       - To continue using the old interface, qualify
       ``bsoncxx::foo`` as ``bsoncxx::v1::foo``.
```

Suggested wording highlights examples of API-only breaking changes.

Note: the "Removes `v_noabi::func()`" case demonstrates the library exercising its right to make ABI breaking changes to entities declared under `v_noabi`, whose ABI stability is not supported. Therefore the removal of such a symbol could be documented under API breaking changes without an accompanying ABI breaking change entry. If this is confusing, we can also list the corresponding ABI breaking change with "Removes the exported symbol `v_noabi::func()`." as suggested in another comment below. See also the suggestion to add a note regarding the exemption of `v_noabi` symbols from ABI version bumps.

- **ABI** changes concern the ABI of the {+driver-short+} libraries. These changes are
  accompanied by an ABI version bump, and may also be accompanied by an API major version
  bump. You might need to rebuild your project or edit your C++ source code to address

>   these changes.

Reviewer: Recommend including an important note here explicitly excluding ABI breaking changes for symbols declared in the `v_noabi` namespace from the ABI version bump requirement:

> [!IMPORTANT]
> ABI stability is not supported for symbols corresponding to entities declared in the `v_noabi` namespace. Breaking changes for such symbols are not necessarily accompanied by an ABI version bump.

I am undecided on whether breaking changes to the unstable ABI should even be documented on this page (since we are not committed to their stability in the first place), but if we do want to list them, then including this note will be important.

Author: My intuition is that it would be in our users' best interest to provide them with this information. We can always remove this note later if we decide to not include breaking changes to the unstable ABI on this page.

  .. example::

>      - Removed exported symbol for ``v1::func(A)``. Use ``v2::func(A)`` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Removes the exported symbol ``v_noabi::func()``.
     - Removes the exported symbol ``v1::func()``.
     - Removes the exported symbols for ``v1::type``.
```

Updated wording highlights the various kinds of exported symbols which may be removed.

Note: symbols under `v_noabi` need not necessarily be accompanied by an ABI version bump, as their stability is not supported. As noted in another comment, I am undecided on whether to include ABI break changes for `v_noabi` symbols on this page as written in my current suggestion.

> - **Build System** changes concern the build system or packaging of the {+driver-short+}

Reviewer 2: S: I don't think "system" needs to be capitalized, since "build system" is lowercase in all other mentions
```suggestion
- **Build system** changes concern the build system or packaging of the {+driver-short+}
```

Author: I had it like this originally, but changed it to uppercase S to align with the way it's formatted in the admonition later on. I prefer lowercase too, though

  libraries. These changes are not necessarily accompanied by either an API major version
  bump or an ABI version bump.

>   To address these changes, you might need to modify your build system configurations,
>   or package or dependency management settings in your projects. You also might need to

Reviewer 2: S: the wording here is a little confusing, maybe:

```suggestion
  To address these changes, you might need to modify your build system configurations or update your project's package or dependency management settings. You also might need to
```

  modify or rebuild your C++ source code.

  .. example::

>      - Removed configuration variable ``ENABLE_FOO``.
>      - Dropped support for platform A / compiler B / architecture C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Removes the ``ENABLE_FOO`` configuration variable.
     - Changes the default value of `ENABLE_BAR` from `OFF` to `ON`.
     - Drops support for platform A, compiler B, and architecture C.
```

Suggested wording also highlights a change of build configuration defaults as a possible breaking change.

  bump or an ABI version bump.
  To address these changes, you might need to modify your build system configurations or
  update your project's package or dependency management settings. You might also need to
  modify or rebuild your C++ source code.

  .. example::

     - Removes the ``ENABLE_FOO`` configuration variable.
     - Changes the default value of the ``ENABLE_BAR`` configuration variable from
       ``OFF`` to ``ON``.
     - Drops support for platform A, compiler B, or architecture C.

.. _upcoming-breaking-changes:

.. _version-3.10:

What's New in 3.10
------------------

.. warning:: Build System Breaking Changes

   The v3.10 driver introduces the following breaking changes to the build system:
   
   - Drops support for calling ``find_package(libbsoncxx)`` and ``find_package(libmongocxx)``.
     Use ``find_package(bsoncxx)`` and ``find_package(mongocxx)``
     instead.
   - Drops support for the ``LIBBSONCXX_*`` and ``LIBMONGOCXX_*`` CMake variables
     provided by the legacy CMake package config files. Use the ``mongo::bsoncxx_*`` and
     ``mongo::mongocxx_*`` CMake targets instead.

>    - Removes the experimental C++ standard library, ``BSONCXX_POLY_USE_STD_EXPERIMENTAL``,
>      as a polyfill option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Removes the ``BSONCXX_POLY_USE_STD_EXPERIMENTAL`` CMake option and drops support for selecting the experimental C++ standard library as a polyfill option.
```

Wording tweak so the config variable isn't in the middle of the change description + distinguishing the CMake variable from the library (the library isn't named `BSONCXX_POLY_USE_STD_EXPERIMENTAL`).

  their prior definitions. For example, ``bsoncxx::document`` is still equivalent to
  ``bsoncxx::v_noabi::document``, and ``mongocxx::client`` is still equivalent to
  ``mongocxx::v_noabi::client``.
- By default, when library filenames are compiled with MSVC (as detected by CMake's ``MSVC``
  variable), they are embedded with an ABI tag string. These strings are similar to
  the following:
  
  .. code-block:: bash

     bsoncxx-v_noabi-rhs-x64-v142-md.lib

  To disable this behavior, set ``ENABLE_ABI_TAG_IN_LIBRARY_FILENAMES=OFF`` as part of
  your CMake configuration.

  The ABI tag string can also be embedded in pkg-config metadata filenames, similar to the
  following:
    
  .. code-block:: bash
      
     libbsoncxx-v_noabi-rhs-x64-v142-md.pc
       
  To enable this behavior, set ``ENABLE_ABI_TAG_IN_LIBRARY_FILENAMES=ON`` and
  ``ENABLE_ABI_TAG_IN_PKGCONFIG_FILENAMES=ON`` as part of your CMake configuration.

To learn more about this release, see the
`v3.10 Release Notes <https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-cxx-driver/releases/tag/r3.10.0>`__
on GitHub.

.. _version-3.9:

What's New in 3.9
-----------------

> .. warning:: Breaking Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. warning:: Build System Breaking Changes
```
These too are breaking changes pertaining only to the build system (not API or ABI).

   The v3.9 driver introduces the following breaking changes:

   - Removes support for exported targets from the CMake project build tree
   - Drops support for macOS 10.14, macOS 10.15, and Ubuntu 14.04

>    - Requires MongoDB C Driver v1.25.0 or later to support the ``FetchContent`` module
>      and for consistency with the MongoDB C Driver
>    - Requires CMake v3.15 or later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Requires MongoDB C Driver v1.25.0 or later
   - Requires CMake v3.15 or later to support the ``FetchContent`` module
```

The note about `FetchContent` pertains to the CMake minimum version bump, not the C Driver minimum version bump. The note about "consistency with the MongoDB C Driver" was aimed at maintainers, not users.

The entry could be simplified further to just: "Requires CMake v3.15 or later".

.. meta::
   :keywords: update, new feature, deprecation, upgrade, driver

Overview
--------

Learn what's new in:

* :ref:`Version 3.10 <version-3.10>`
* :ref:`Version 3.9 <version-3.9>`

> Breaking Change Types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Types of Breaking Changes
```

  Root namespace declarations are still supported and expected to remain equivalent to
  their prior definitions. For example, ``bsoncxx::document`` is still equivalent to
  ``bsoncxx::v_noabi::document``, and ``mongocxx::client`` is still equivalent to

>   ``mongocxx::v_noabi::client``. If this change breaks source or binary compatibility,
>   please submit a :ref:`bug report <cpp-issues-help>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``mongocxx::v_noabi::client``.
```
As noted in an [earlier comment](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-cpp/pull/49#discussion_r1697466691), this recommendation is implicit. Recommend omitting it from the list.
